# Text Editors

Where do I write the instructions to tell the computer what I want it to do? This question is apparently considered to
be a very stupid question indeed. It is actually very difficult to get a straight answer to this. If you look on the
internet for the answer, you will find a myriad of different answers and explanations. Few of them actually answer
anything for the new developer. So, we will attempt to give a simple answer to this simple question. Let's begin at the
beginning.

Long ago, there was no such thing as a "development environment" or a "framework" or "text editors".  There was only the
humble file. A file is the digital equivalent of a piece of paper. That is all that it is. It is a blank page that you
can write computer instructions in. So, how does the computer know that this piece of paper is something the computer is
supposed to read and then do? Simple. *You* tell it to. That's right, you tell the computer that this piece of paper is
something that the computer should read and execute when you tell it to do so. How do you tell it this? By using a *file
extension*. A file extension is a ( . ) followed by a series of letters. These letters tell the computer what kind of
file your instructions are. By use of file extensions the computer knows what to do with that file. There are many
different types of file extensions. The ones you will work with the most are likely extensions like .html or .css or
.js. By placing the file extension at the end of the file name you are telling the computer what kind of file it is. It
can then figure out what to do with it when you tell it to execute the instructions.

Working with just a blank file has its disadvantages. You have to write everything you want the computer to do. You have
to keep track that everything written in the file is written correctly. You are responsible to ensure your code is
formatted so that it can be clearly read. You get no help from the computer to ensure your file is being written
correctly or that it is formatted clearly. Sometimes your code must be repetitive or you find the same block of code
must be reproduced elsewhere in your file. This can be tedious and waste time better spent on actually development. In
order to solve some of these problems, developers over the years have created programs that allow you to write your
code, help you format it correctly, point out any errors, and keep your files organized. All this is done by the program
so you don't have to do it yourself. The simplest of these are called text-editors.

## What Does A Text Editor Do?

Text editors are like a package of tools that help you to write code. They can organize files, point out errors,
automatically format lines of code, and a lot of other things. The purpose of a text ediotr is to allow the developer to
get on with developing without having to handle all of the minor details that go along with that activity. They also
provide some very helpful tools that directly assist you as you develop your programs. There are several different types
of text editors. We suggest you begin with a text editor called Sublime. It is easy to learn and use almost right away.
It also has the advantage of being very customizable. As you become more familiar with the text editor environement, you
may find that you like using certain tools and settings more than others. Sublime allows you set up your working area in
the manner which suits you best, and makes it easy to do so.

Text editors are not just for writing code files. You can edit, create, and modify any type of text-based file. You
could use a text editor to fix that letter to grandma or create a shopping list. The point is text editors are not just
for code. However, it just so happens that this is what they are normally used for. But you can pull out any text file
in your text editor and modify it. It is really just a glorfied Notepad.

Let's open up the text editor and see some of the basic functions:

* Go to the Sublime website. There you will find instructions on how to download Sublime on your machine. Our primary
  platform is Linux Ubuntu 20.04, so you will want to find the instructions for that Linux distribution.

* Once you have Sublime downloaded onto your machine, just click on the icon for Sublime to open the text editor.

* Go to the menu bar at the top of the screen. Click on File. A menu will drop down giving you several options. Click on
  Open Folder. Now, select a folder you want to open.

* The folder will appear in a bar on the left. Any folders inside the main folder will also be visible. Just click on
  the left pointing arrows to show the contents of the f older.

* Now double click on the file you want to open.

* That's it. The contents of the file should be visible on the screen.

* Now you can add text or make other changes to the file. Then save the file and your changes will be kept.

When you open a file that has a code file extension, like .js or .html, the computer and the text editor know that the
file is a code file. Your text editor will automatically apply a feature of your code editor called "text highlighting".
Text highlighting changes the color of different pieces of text in the editor depending on what that code represents. A
variable may be written in red while a string may be rendered in blue. This is a fast, handy way for you to see all the
parts of your code at the same time. It also provides a clue for times when you might be writing your code wrong. You
may expect to see a few words of your code turn red when you have declared a variable, but it doesn't. Looking more
closely, you will find your syntax is in error. Hence, the color of the text doesn't change. After awhile, you'll get
kind of addicted to text highlighting.....just like everyone else has. You can change the way the text highlighting is
rendered, or you can turn it off completely. This feature is so widespread in software development that the vast
majority of developers use it in one form or another. The colors used for various parts of your code carry over to
everyone else's code as well. Therefore, it is advised that you don't change the colors from the ones already used by
the text highlighter.

### What is the Difference Between a Text Editor and a Code Editor?

A text editor allows you to edit any text. The file you are working with does not have to be a code file. It can be anything
with text. A code editor is optimized for writing computer code. It has features specifically for writing just code. It can
determine what coding language you are using,
it provides text color to help you see what parts are what in your code, and it manages the files and
directories of your project. It can also spot errors in your code right away. All of this speeds your development time.
Code editors do a lot more than what has been described here. They have a whole host of features.
As you become more familiar with using a code editor you may find you like things set a certain way or that you prefer a
certain feature more than another. A good code editor can handle any set-up you may prefer.

## Integrated Development Environment (IDE)

An IDE is a set of tools all grouped in one application used by the developer to handle every aspect of software
development. Everything from file management to error handling to security is handled within an IDE. This is very
different from a code editor. Your text editor is really just that, an editor for writing and editing text. Many text
editors have similar features to an IDE, but not anywhere near to the extent of an IDE. IDE's are not usually needed for
web development work. For now, we will just use the Sublime Text Editor.
